# [Modelling Land Cover Change Using Geographic Information Systems, Remote Sensing, an Urbanization-suitability Layer and SLEUTH-3r for Groningen, the Netherlands](https://dhvenema.github.io/SLEUTH-Groningen/)

As urbanization occurs, cities and villages expand outwards claiming new areas. This process exerts high pressure on the open and natural environment and signifies the importance of urban management and development. However, the driving forces and effects associated with urbanization affect various disciplines, and temporal and spatial scales, which makes understanding and describing them and their interrelations a complex issue (Goldstein, et al. 2004). An urban model could function as a planning support system to obtain said knowledge, because it enables the simplification of urban complexity and allows to combine several disciplines in a multi-disciplinary approach. For studying the urban environment, cellular automata has become a popular and successful modelling method due to its simplicity to replicate the urban complexity.

This master’s thesis was aimed at studying the urban growth patterns in Groningen by applying a planning support system, namely the cellular automaton SLEUTH. The main objective of this research was to calibrate and validate SLEUTH to fit Groningen’s context in an attempt to predict the future land cover change of Groningen up to 2045. It did this with an integrated application of: Geographical Information Systems, remote sensing, and a multicriteria evaluation.

The cellular automata method is underpinned by Complexity Theory. A theory that does not have a precise definition, instead, it is described by characteristics, such as self-organizing, dynamical, chaotic and critical nature, non-linearity, emergence and self-similarity. These characteristics are derived from other paradigms that reach back to the 19th century, such as Cerdá’s Theory on Urbanización and Geddes’ Evolutionary Paradigm and Emergence, and other paradigms that have roots in physics and mathematics, such as The General Systems Theory, Chaos Theory and fractal geometry. Wolfram (1984b) showed that the characteristics of these paradigms and theories exist in cellular automata, and cellular automatons were able to capture complex emerging structures based on simple mathematical rules. Couclelis (1985; 1989) developed the first theoretical approaches for the spatial application of cellular automata to cities. After which, Itami (1994) theorized that if cellular automata is applied to a lattice, it could also be integrated into Geographical Information Systems to facilitate visualization and interpretation of the simulation results. Then in the 1990s, the first urban cellular automatons were developed by Batty and Xie (1994), White et al. (1997) and Clarke et al. (1997).

In this master’s thesis an overview was presented of fundamental principles of urban modelling, after which two modelling methods were elaborated: agent-based modelling and cellular automata. Five urban models are discussed that can simulate land cover change (UrbanSim, Metronamica, Dinamica EGO, CLUE and SLEUTH), thereafter the SLEUTH model is adopted for this research and explained in detail. The urban extent input data was derived from a land use classification by object-based remote sensing. In addition, the excluded layer is an important input data layer of SLEUTH, as it plays a key role in accommodating for the dispersed urban growth patterns in Groningen. For this study, the excluded layer was an urbanization-suitability layer through a multicriteria evaluation, wherein factors were standardized through fuzzy set theory and weighted by analytical hierarchy process.

Further, calibration and validation are essential parts of predictive modelling and become even more important when models are used as planning support systems. Often the schism between these parts is poorly defined (Pontius, et al., 2004). In light of this critique, the validation procedure for his research was separated through time, where the input data from 1973 up to 2006 was part of model calibration through the use of a regular ‘Brute-Force’ calibration with the Optimal SLEUTH metric (Silva & Clarke, 2002), and the urban area and patterns of 2006 up to 2015 was predicted, which were used for model validation by three-map comparison (Pontius, et al., 2008), budgets of components of agreement and disagreement, and multiple resolution comparison (Pontius, et al., 2011; Pontius, et al., 2004).

The modelling results of calibration showed that based on the goodness of fit measures that E0 performed below acceptable, which is the regular excluded layer only incorporating constraints. E1 should be considered a questionable result, which is the excluded layer based on a multicriteria evaluation. E2 and E3 achieved sufficient fit, which are the excluded layers based on a multicriteria evaluation that includes the policies of respectively, 1971 and 1978. Validation showed that for none of the excluded layers, the amount correctly predicted change was larger than the sum of the various types of error, i.e. a figure of merit of 50%. In fact, the highest overall figure of merit was only 25%, showing SLEUTH had difficulties in accurately simulating under these circumstances. Further, validation showed that all excluded layers achieved higher fit-score than their random counterpart, yet none were able to achieve higher fit-scores than the null map at the finest resolution (i.e. 30 m). Which suggest that having a map of 2006 is a better predictor of the urban growth patterns in 2015 than any of the excluded layers at the finest resolution. Notwithstanding, allocation disagreement resolved at coarser resolutions and at a resolution of 16 or 32 times the cell side, E2 and E3 were more accurate than the null map and the random map, and achieved a figure of merit up to 30%. This suggests that SLEUTH is able to provide good expression of neighborhood relationship at coarser scales. In addition, based on validation and compared to the FOM of other applications (Pontius, et al., 2008), E2 and E3 could be classified as reasonably accurate, E0 had a low accuracy and E1 had mediocre accuracy at best. Further in-depth analysis showed that SLEUTH lacks mechanism that were found important to the study area. For example, the study area could benefit from a multi-scale or multi-resolution approach, and the inclusion of models that could forecast regional demands regarding real-estate and changes in demographics, to account for regional differences.

Concluding, to answer to the main research question, none of the excluded layers were capable of capturing the dispersed urban growth patterns in the study area during simulation or prediction. Hence, the assumption was made that the scenarios used for predicting, would also not be able to produce accurate urban growth patterns, as these are based on the same principles as used in the excluded layers. Despite, the integrated application of Geographical Information Systems, remote sensing, a multicriteria evaluation for urban suitability and SLEUTH, did show (much) higher goodness of fit and (much) higher accuracy for the excluded layers that incorporated an urbanization-suitability layer based on an multicriteria evaluation, as compared to the excluded layer that did not. Thus, SLEUTH’s excluded layer could be further tested and improved to fit Groningen’s context, SLEUTH could be coupled with complementary methods to include demographics or socio-economic variables, or a different urban model could be used that includes more sophisticated mechanics.
